README.md, before:

# PostgreSQL Data Computing Platform (PgDCP)

PgDCP is Netspective's approach for using PostgreSQL to host tables, views, plus polyglot stored routines and surface them as GraphQL and REST using Postgraphile, Hasura, and PostgREST (or [pREST](https://github.com/prest/prest)). Using PostgreSQL whenever possible is called our _Zero Middleware_ automated backend as a service (AutoBaaS) strategy. AutoBaaS helps us eliminate signficant amounts of GraphQL and REST boilerplate code plus reduces the number of microservices we need to deploy and manage. 

_Zero Middleware_ is first and foremost a *technology strategy* but also comes with a framework of code generators and reusable components to reducing data-centric code surfaces to just PostgreSQL with auto-generated, database-first _secure_ GraphQL and REST endpoints. For use cases when higher-performance or more secure interfaces are necessary, direct access to tables, views, and stored routines using PostgreSQL wire protocol is encouraged.

We use `psql` and pure-Postgres migrations as Database as Code (“DaC”) for DDL, DQL, DML, etc. when possible. Instead of relying on 3rd party dependencies for schema migrations, we use PostgreSQL-first stored routines themselves along with `psql` to manage idempotent migrations. 

The overall objective for PgDCP is to reduce the number of tools that a developer needs to know down to just PostgreSQL and `psql` along with SQL and PL/* hosted languages for all services.

## Fear the Movement of Data! (FMD!)

The more we move data from one system to another (e.g. traditional ETL or it's cooler cousin ELTs), the more likely we are to run into scalability problems. Almost all modern databases are pretty good at querying and are able to do optimizations to improve querying either using vertical scaling or, in advanced cases, using horizontal scaling. However, no databases are good at moving data at scale. The reason we should fear the movement of data is that moving data from one system into another or vice-versa is almost always the most time-consuming part of data computing stacks. 

Whenever dealing with data at scale, bring "*compute* to data" rather that "*moving data* to the compute clusters". PgDCP as an approach tries to use FDWs to leave data in their original locations when possible and only move the specific data when it cannot be processed in its original location. If it cannot eliminate data movement from source systems, PgDCP tries to reduce data movement to only a single data move into the PgDCP environment and then uses schemas, views, materialized views, etc. to transform data *virtually* instead of *physically*.

Even when applying Unified Star Schemas (USS), Dimensional Modeling, Dault Vault 2.0, or other techniques we try to use late-binding rather than early-binding when possible.

## Polyglot but SQL-first

Our first choice of languages for writing data-centric micro services should be:

* Pure SQL views, materialized views, and stored routines using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).
* pgSQL views and materialized views and PL/pgSQL stored functions and stored procedures when pure SQL is not possible, using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).

In case SQL or PL/pgSQL is not appropriate:

* PL/Rust, PL/Java, PL/Go, [PL/Deno](https://github.com/supabase/postgres-deno) or other type-safe PostgreSQL-hosted language should be prioritized.
* If type-safety is not possible or 3rd party libraries access is more important than type-safety then PL/Python, PL/Perl, and other languages should be considered.
  * When using PL/Python or other language with package managers, consider using guidance such as [programmatic access to PIP modules](http://jelly.codes/articles/python-pip-module/) so that PostgreSQL server admins are not required for administering module dependencies
* The choice of language should depend on how easy the functionality can be expressed using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).

## Information Assurance and Security _in the Database_

PgDCP requires _database-first_ security, which means PostgreSQL schemas, users, roles, permissions, and row-level security (RLS) should drive all data security requirements. Role-based access control (RBAC) and attribute based access control (ABAC) should be implemented in PostgreSQL stored routines. If necessary, [ldap2pg](https://github.com/dalibo/ldap2pg) can be used to synchronize roles with LDAP.

## Deliberate and Disciplined Change Management _in the Database_

In PgDCP PostgreSQL is not treated as a "bit bucket" where you just store data for an application. It's the center and most important part of our services' universe and requires a deliberate, disciplined, database-first change management approach. While there are many database migrations tools like LiquiBase, Flyway, and Sqitch, they all assume that the problem should be solved in a database-independent manner outside of PostgreSQL. Since the PgDCP approach is to double-down on PostgreSQL and not worry about database portability, we want to perform PosgreSQL-first database change management. See tools like [postgresql\-dbpatch](https://github.com/linz/postgresql-dbpatch), which support conducting database changes and deploying them in a robust and automated way through the database instead of external tools.

## Integrated Observability for Metrics and Traceability _in the Database_

Observability of the database is important for forensics and quality assurance. Try to use [simplified auditing based on SQL logging and FDWs to import logs](https://mydbanotebook.org/post/auditing/) instead of writing brittle custom triggers on each table/object. Separate observability into DDL changes, which can be alerted upon, as well as DML change logs which can be used for forensics. Wrap the observability of logs into a metrics table that can be scraped by Prometheus and used for alerting (e.g. whenever DDL changes occur, send alerts to anyone who needs to be informed). 

Especially important is to integrate OpenTelemetry trace IDs into each DDL and DML statement so that end to end traceability becomes native to the database. Being able to track context and propogation of SQL through service layers will be critical to maintain high quality and reliability. 

## Client Application-friendly Type-safety _in the Database_

Modern applications demand type-safety (which is why PgDCP recommends TypeScript or Rust for applications). Since applications should be type-safe, we want our data models and database objects to also be type-safe. To enhance type-safety, create custom [domains](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/domains.html), custom enumerations or lookup tables based on inheritance, [business types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createtype.html), and [inheritable transaction tables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-inherit.html) ("table types"). Once you're using table inheritance you can use [table inheritance wrapper functions](https://github.com/trimark-jp/tm-postgres-basics).

## GraphQL-first but REST-capable _in the Database_

All micro services code in PostgreSQL tables, views, functions and stored procedures will be surfaced through Postgraphile GraphQL first but our AutoBaaS requirements are that all services should be exposed through safe and secure REST interfaces via PostgREST (or [pREST](https://github.com/prest/prest)) as a fallback for non-GraphQL clients. We favor Postgraphile's GraphQL API because it generates code which honors PostgreSQL security, roles, and unique features more faithfully than other utilities such as Hasura. 

## Friendlier and Safer Experimentation

Promote the use of [Database Lab Engine (DLE)](https://gitlab.com/postgres-ai/database-lab) to "provision independent non-production environments with multi-terabyte PostgreSQL databases in a few seconds." Every developer should be able to have their own easy to create and teardown development instances for experimentation purposes and to make sure scripts are idempotent and repeatable. If database cannot be easily torn down and recreated in development and quality assurance environments, scripting is harder.

Part of the DLE is "Joe", which should be used by engineering and QA teams:

> “Joe Bot”, a virtual DBA for SQL optimization, is a revolutionary new way to troubleshoot and optimize PostgreSQL query performance. Instead of running EXPLAIN or EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS) directly in production, users send queries for troubleshooting to Joe Bot. Joe Bot uses the Database Lab Engine (DLE) to:
> * Generate a fresh thin clone
> * Execute the query on the clone
> * Return the resulting execution plan to the user
> * The returned plan is identical to production in terms of structure and data volumes – this is achieved thanks to two factors: thin clones have the same data and statistics as production (at a specified point in time), and the PostgreSQL planner configuration on clones matches the production configuration.

## Assurance as Code _in the Database_

All code in PostgreSQL should be tested, or _assured_, with pgTAP code. All _Assurance Engineering Cases_ (AECs) should be written code-first, not human-first (what we call  _Assurance as Code_).

## Microsoft Excel-first UX but client-independent

Microsoft Excel should be the first UI that all data access should be designed for when accessing outside of developer-centric PgDCP use cases. If Excel can properly show your data, in a safe, secure, and performant way, then every other client can also do so. Excel-first UX should target "live ODBC" use cases where the database is directly accessed using PostgreSQL binary protocol.

## Primary Keys vs. Surrogate Keys for external consumption

Good security practice for modern apps that will allow record IDs to be shared externally is to either have UUID or shortkey (see below) non-serial primary keys. If you use a `serial` type primary key, never send the PK out for external consumption - always use surrogate keys via [uuid\-ossp](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/uuid-ossp.html) or similar. If you use a serial PK and share the ID externally then it will be possible for external users to "guess" IDs since the PKs would adjacent numerically.

## PgDCP Engineering Resources

Platform and site reliability engineers should review:

* [psql command line tutorial and cheat sheet](https://github.com/tomcam/postgres)
* [Postgres features showcase \(commented SQL samples\)](https://github.com/cybertec-postgresql/postgres-showcase)
* [postgres_dba](https://github.com/NikolayS/postgres_dba) set of useful tools for Postgres DBAs and all engineers
* [Set of Practices](https://kukuruku.co/post/postgresql-set-of-practices/) for common PG engineering suggestions
* [pgcenter](https://github.com/lesovsky/pgcenter) CLI tool for observing and troubleshooting Postgres
* [PGXN client](https://github.com/pgxn/pgxnclient) CLI tool to interact with the PostgreSQL Extension Network
* [Useful views and functions for postgreSQL DBA's](https://github.com/sahapasci/dba.postgresql)
* [Postgres clone schema utility](https://github.com/denishpatel/pg-clone-schema) without need of going outside of database. Makes developers life easy by running single function to clone schema with all objects. It is very handy on Postgres RDS.

Engineers writing stored routines (functions, SPs) should review:

* [Boost your User-Defined Functions in PostgreSQL](https://www.ongres.com/blog/boost-your-user-defined-functions-in-postgresql/) describes some useful techniques for improving UDFs.

Engineers writing applications should consider these PostgreSQL-native libraries:

* [makeExtendSchemaPlugin](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/make-extend-schema-plugin/) merges additional GraphQL types and resolvers into a Postgraphile PostgreSQL schema using a similar syntax to [graphql-tools](https://www.graphql-tools.com/docs/generate-schema).
* [uuid\-ossp](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/uuid-ossp.html) for UUIDs as primary keys
* [ltree](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/ltree.html) for representing labels of data stored in a hierarchical tree\-like structure
* [pg_trgm](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/pgtrgm.html) module provides functions and operators for determining the similarity of alphanumeric text based on trigram matching
* [simplified auditing based on SQL logging and FDWs to import logs](https://mydbanotebook.org/post/auditing/) instead of writing triggers
* [Audit Trigger 91plus](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Audit_trigger_91plus) generic trigger function used for recording changes to tables into an audit log table
* [pg_cron](https://github.com/citusdata/pg_cron) to run periodic jobs in PostgreSQL
* [shortkey](https://github.com/turbo/pg-shortkey) for YouTube-like Short IDs as Postgres Primary Keys
* [dexter](https://github.com/ankane/dexter) automatic indexer
* [message-db](https://github.com/message-db/message-db) message and event store
* [RecDB Recommendation Engine](https://github.com/DataSystemsLab/recdb-postgresql)
* [pg_similarity](http://www.postgresql.org/) extension to support similarity queries on PostgreSQL
* [dox Document Database API extension](https://github.com/robconery/dox) when needing simple JSON store
* [colpivot.sql](https://github.com/hnsl/colpivot) dynamic row to column pivotation/transpose
* [Guidance to implement NIST level 2 RBAC Hierarchical RBAC](https://github.com/morenoh149/postgresDBSamples/tree/master/role-based-access-control) in PostgreSQL
* [ldap2pg](https://github.com/dalibo/ldap2pg) to synchronize Postgres roles and privileges from YAML or LDAP
* [SeeQR](https://www.theseeqr.io/) database analytic tool to compare the efficiency of different schemas and queries on a granular level
* [postgres\-basename\-dirname](https://github.com/elfsternberg/postgres-basename-dirname) contains functions which provide equivalents to the POSIX functions basename and dirname
* [postgresql\-similarity](https://github.com/urbic/postgresql-similarity) extension package which provides functions that calculate similarity between two strings
* [pg\_median\_utils](https://github.com/greenape/pg_median_utils) functions like median_filter which behaves the same as SciPy's [medfilt](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.14.0/reference/generated/scipy.signal.medfilt.html)
* [orafce](https://github.com/orafce/orafce) ORACLE compatibility functions
* [postgres\-typescript](https://github.com/Portchain/postgres-typescript) generates typescript functions from SQL files and lets you call these functions from your app
* [SPARQL compiler functions for PostgreSQL](https://github.com/lacanoid/pgsparql)

Engineers writing SQL-first code should use the following tools:

* [sqlcheck](https://github.com/jarulraj/sqlcheck) and [plpgsql_check](https://github.com/okbob/plpgsql_check) for linting SQL source code
* [pgTAP](https://pgtap.org/) - Database testing framework for Postgres
* [pgcmp](https://github.com/cbbrowne/pgcmp) for comparing Postgres database schemas
* [Web-based Explain Visualizer \(pev\)](https://github.com/AlexTatiyants/pev) and [CLI query visualizer (gocmdpev)](https://github.com/simon-engledew/gocmdpev) for performance optimization
* [JSON Schema validation for PostgreSQL](https://github.com/gavinwahl/postgres-json-schema) when using JSON and JSONB columns
* Use [readable database errors](https://github.com/Shyp/go-dberror) as a guide for creating errors in the database which can be used in the front-end
* [postgresqltuner](https://github.com/jfcoz/postgresqltuner) script to analyse PostgreSQL database configuration, and give tuning advice
* Use [HyperLogLog data structures](https://github.com/citusdata/postgresql-hll) and [TopN PostgreSQL extension](https://github.com/citusdata/postgresql-topn) for higher performing value counting when data amounts get large
* See [GraphQL for Postgres](https://github.com/solidsnack/GraphpostgresQL) which teaches techniques for how to parse GraphQL queries and transform them into SQL, all inside PostgreSQL (this is not production-level code but is good for education)

Engineers needing to instrument PostgreSQL:

* Deno [Postgres SQL parser](https://github.com/oguimbal/pgsql-ast-parser)

Machine Learning without leaving PostgreSQL:

* [Apache MADlib](https://madlib.apache.org/)
* [mindsdb.com](https://mindsdb.com/) for machine Learning without leaving the database

Content engineers who need datasets:

* [pgloader](https://pgloader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) loads data from various sources into PostgreSQL
* [ISO\-3166 \- All countries and subcountries in the world](https://github.com/morenoh149/postgresDBSamples)

Precision Knowledge:

* [Beyond REST](https://netflixtechblog.com/beyond-rest-1b76f7c20ef6) is Netflix's approach to Rapid Development with GraphQL Microservices
* [6 Common Mistakes for SQL Queries that "Should be Working"](https://blog.arctype.com/6-common-mistakes-for-sql-queries/)
* [Postgres regex search over 10,000 GitHub repositories \(using only a Macbook\)](https://devlog.hexops.com/2021/postgres-regex-search-over-10000-github-repositories)
* [How to Modernize Your Data & Analytics Platform](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-1-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa/) parts [one](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-1-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa), [two](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-2-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa), [three](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-3-4-toolkit-modernizing-transmission-system-data-alaa-mahjoub), and [four](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-4-toolkit-modernizing-transmission-system-data-platform-mahjoub).

## Stateless, non-data-centric services, are out of scope

If a custom micro service is completely stateless and does not have anything to do with reading or writing structured data, it should be written in TypeScript hosted on Deno or other micro service using Microsoft Dapr sidecar.

Commit message:

doc: add db client trace guidance

README.md, after:

# PostgreSQL Data Computing Platform (PgDCP)

PgDCP is Netspective's approach for using PostgreSQL to host tables, views, plus polyglot stored routines and surface them as GraphQL and REST using Postgraphile, Hasura, and PostgREST (or [pREST](https://github.com/prest/prest)). Using PostgreSQL whenever possible is called our _Zero Middleware_ automated backend as a service (AutoBaaS) strategy. AutoBaaS helps us eliminate signficant amounts of GraphQL and REST boilerplate code plus reduces the number of microservices we need to deploy and manage. 

_Zero Middleware_ is first and foremost a *technology strategy* but also comes with a framework of code generators and reusable components to reducing data-centric code surfaces to just PostgreSQL with auto-generated, database-first _secure_ GraphQL and REST endpoints. For use cases when higher-performance or more secure interfaces are necessary, direct access to tables, views, and stored routines using PostgreSQL wire protocol is encouraged.

We use `psql` and pure-Postgres migrations as Database as Code (“DaC”) for DDL, DQL, DML, etc. when possible. Instead of relying on 3rd party dependencies for schema migrations, we use PostgreSQL-first stored routines themselves along with `psql` to manage idempotent migrations. 

The overall objective for PgDCP is to reduce the number of tools that a developer needs to know down to just PostgreSQL and `psql` along with SQL and PL/* hosted languages for all services.

## Fear the Movement of Data! (FMD!)

The more we move data from one system to another (e.g. traditional ETL or it's cooler cousin ELTs), the more likely we are to run into scalability problems. Almost all modern databases are pretty good at querying and are able to do optimizations to improve querying either using vertical scaling or, in advanced cases, using horizontal scaling. However, no databases are good at moving data at scale. The reason we should fear the movement of data is that moving data from one system into another or vice-versa is almost always the most time-consuming part of data computing stacks. 

Whenever dealing with data at scale, bring "*compute* to data" rather that "*moving data* to the compute clusters". PgDCP as an approach tries to use FDWs to leave data in their original locations when possible and only move the specific data when it cannot be processed in its original location. If it cannot eliminate data movement from source systems, PgDCP tries to reduce data movement to only a single data move into the PgDCP environment and then uses schemas, views, materialized views, etc. to transform data *virtually* instead of *physically*.

Even when applying Unified Star Schemas (USS), Dimensional Modeling, Dault Vault 2.0, or other techniques we try to use late-binding rather than early-binding when possible.

## Polyglot but SQL-first

Our first choice of languages for writing data-centric micro services should be:

* Pure SQL views, materialized views, and stored routines using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).
* pgSQL views and materialized views and PL/pgSQL stored functions and stored procedures when pure SQL is not possible, using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).

In case SQL or PL/pgSQL is not appropriate:

* PL/Rust, PL/Java, PL/Go, [PL/Deno](https://github.com/supabase/postgres-deno) or other type-safe PostgreSQL-hosted language should be prioritized.
* If type-safety is not possible or 3rd party libraries access is more important than type-safety then PL/Python, PL/Perl, and other languages should be considered.
  * When using PL/Python or other language with package managers, consider using guidance such as [programmatic access to PIP modules](http://jelly.codes/articles/python-pip-module/) so that PostgreSQL server admins are not required for administering module dependencies
* The choice of language should depend on how easy the functionality can be expressed using [Postgraphile Schema Design](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/postgresql-schema-design/).

## Information Assurance and Security _in the Database_

PgDCP requires _database-first_ security, which means PostgreSQL schemas, users, roles, permissions, and row-level security (RLS) should drive all data security requirements. Role-based access control (RBAC) and attribute based access control (ABAC) should be implemented in PostgreSQL stored routines. If necessary, [ldap2pg](https://github.com/dalibo/ldap2pg) can be used to synchronize roles with LDAP.

## Deliberate and Disciplined Change Management _in the Database_

In PgDCP PostgreSQL is not treated as a "bit bucket" where you just store data for an application. It's the center and most important part of our services' universe and requires a deliberate, disciplined, database-first change management approach. While there are many database migrations tools like LiquiBase, Flyway, and Sqitch, they all assume that the problem should be solved in a database-independent manner outside of PostgreSQL. Since the PgDCP approach is to double-down on PostgreSQL and not worry about database portability, we want to perform PosgreSQL-first database change management. See tools like [postgresql\-dbpatch](https://github.com/linz/postgresql-dbpatch), which support conducting database changes and deploying them in a robust and automated way through the database instead of external tools.

## Integrated Observability for Health, Metrics and Traceability _in the Database_

Observability of the database is important for forensics and quality assurance. Try to use [simplified auditing based on SQL logging and FDWs to import logs](https://mydbanotebook.org/post/auditing/) instead of writing brittle custom triggers on each table/object. Separate observability into DDL changes, which can be alerted upon, as well as DML change logs which can be used for forensics. Wrap the observability of logs into a metrics table that can be scraped by Prometheus and used for alerting (e.g. whenever DDL changes occur, send alerts to anyone who needs to be informed). 

Especially important is to integrate OpenTelemetry trace IDs into each DDL and DML statement so that end to end traceability becomes native to the database. Being able to track context and propogation of SQL through service layers will be critical to maintain high quality and reliability. 

See [semantic conventions for database client calls](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/database.md) for how to provide traceability for database client calls and integrate W3C's Trace Context.

## Client Application-friendly Type-safety _in the Database_

Modern applications demand type-safety (which is why PgDCP recommends TypeScript or Rust for applications). Since applications should be type-safe, we want our data models and database objects to also be type-safe. To enhance type-safety, create custom [domains](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/domains.html), custom enumerations or lookup tables based on inheritance, [business types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createtype.html), and [inheritable transaction tables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-inherit.html) ("table types"). Once you're using table inheritance you can use [table inheritance wrapper functions](https://github.com/trimark-jp/tm-postgres-basics).

## GraphQL-first but REST-capable _in the Database_

All micro services code in PostgreSQL tables, views, functions and stored procedures will be surfaced through Postgraphile GraphQL first but our AutoBaaS requirements are that all services should be exposed through safe and secure REST interfaces via PostgREST (or [pREST](https://github.com/prest/prest)) as a fallback for non-GraphQL clients. We favor Postgraphile's GraphQL API because it generates code which honors PostgreSQL security, roles, and unique features more faithfully than other utilities such as Hasura. 

## Friendlier and Safer Experimentation

Promote the use of [Database Lab Engine (DLE)](https://gitlab.com/postgres-ai/database-lab) to "provision independent non-production environments with multi-terabyte PostgreSQL databases in a few seconds." Every developer should be able to have their own easy to create and teardown development instances for experimentation purposes and to make sure scripts are idempotent and repeatable. If database cannot be easily torn down and recreated in development and quality assurance environments, scripting is harder.

Part of the DLE is "Joe", which should be used by engineering and QA teams:

> “Joe Bot”, a virtual DBA for SQL optimization, is a revolutionary new way to troubleshoot and optimize PostgreSQL query performance. Instead of running EXPLAIN or EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS) directly in production, users send queries for troubleshooting to Joe Bot. Joe Bot uses the Database Lab Engine (DLE) to:
> * Generate a fresh thin clone
> * Execute the query on the clone
> * Return the resulting execution plan to the user
> * The returned plan is identical to production in terms of structure and data volumes – this is achieved thanks to two factors: thin clones have the same data and statistics as production (at a specified point in time), and the PostgreSQL planner configuration on clones matches the production configuration.

## Assurance as Code _in the Database_

All code in PostgreSQL should be tested, or _assured_, with pgTAP code. All _Assurance Engineering Cases_ (AECs) should be written code-first, not human-first (what we call  _Assurance as Code_).

## Microsoft Excel-first UX but client-independent

Microsoft Excel should be the first UI that all data access should be designed for when accessing outside of developer-centric PgDCP use cases. If Excel can properly show your data, in a safe, secure, and performant way, then every other client can also do so. Excel-first UX should target "live ODBC" use cases where the database is directly accessed using PostgreSQL binary protocol.

## Primary Keys vs. Surrogate Keys for external consumption

Good security practice for modern apps that will allow record IDs to be shared externally is to either have UUID or shortkey (see below) non-serial primary keys. If you use a `serial` type primary key, never send the PK out for external consumption - always use surrogate keys via [uuid\-ossp](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/uuid-ossp.html) or similar. If you use a serial PK and share the ID externally then it will be possible for external users to "guess" IDs since the PKs would adjacent numerically.

## PgDCP Engineering Resources

Platform and site reliability engineers should review:

* [psql command line tutorial and cheat sheet](https://github.com/tomcam/postgres)
* [Postgres features showcase \(commented SQL samples\)](https://github.com/cybertec-postgresql/postgres-showcase)
* [postgres_dba](https://github.com/NikolayS/postgres_dba) set of useful tools for Postgres DBAs and all engineers
* [Set of Practices](https://kukuruku.co/post/postgresql-set-of-practices/) for common PG engineering suggestions
* [pgcenter](https://github.com/lesovsky/pgcenter) CLI tool for observing and troubleshooting Postgres
* [PGXN client](https://github.com/pgxn/pgxnclient) CLI tool to interact with the PostgreSQL Extension Network
* [Useful views and functions for postgreSQL DBA's](https://github.com/sahapasci/dba.postgresql)
* [Postgres clone schema utility](https://github.com/denishpatel/pg-clone-schema) without need of going outside of database. Makes developers life easy by running single function to clone schema with all objects. It is very handy on Postgres RDS.

Engineers writing stored routines (functions, SPs) should review:

* [Boost your User-Defined Functions in PostgreSQL](https://www.ongres.com/blog/boost-your-user-defined-functions-in-postgresql/) describes some useful techniques for improving UDFs.

Engineers writing applications should consider these PostgreSQL-native libraries:

* [makeExtendSchemaPlugin](https://www.graphile.org/postgraphile/make-extend-schema-plugin/) merges additional GraphQL types and resolvers into a Postgraphile PostgreSQL schema using a similar syntax to [graphql-tools](https://www.graphql-tools.com/docs/generate-schema).
* [uuid\-ossp](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/uuid-ossp.html) for UUIDs as primary keys
* [ltree](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/ltree.html) for representing labels of data stored in a hierarchical tree\-like structure
* [pg_trgm](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/pgtrgm.html) module provides functions and operators for determining the similarity of alphanumeric text based on trigram matching
* [simplified auditing based on SQL logging and FDWs to import logs](https://mydbanotebook.org/post/auditing/) instead of writing triggers
* [Audit Trigger 91plus](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Audit_trigger_91plus) generic trigger function used for recording changes to tables into an audit log table
* [pg_cron](https://github.com/citusdata/pg_cron) to run periodic jobs in PostgreSQL
* [shortkey](https://github.com/turbo/pg-shortkey) for YouTube-like Short IDs as Postgres Primary Keys
* [dexter](https://github.com/ankane/dexter) automatic indexer
* [message-db](https://github.com/message-db/message-db) message and event store
* [RecDB Recommendation Engine](https://github.com/DataSystemsLab/recdb-postgresql)
* [pg_similarity](http://www.postgresql.org/) extension to support similarity queries on PostgreSQL
* [dox Document Database API extension](https://github.com/robconery/dox) when needing simple JSON store
* [colpivot.sql](https://github.com/hnsl/colpivot) dynamic row to column pivotation/transpose
* [Guidance to implement NIST level 2 RBAC Hierarchical RBAC](https://github.com/morenoh149/postgresDBSamples/tree/master/role-based-access-control) in PostgreSQL
* [ldap2pg](https://github.com/dalibo/ldap2pg) to synchronize Postgres roles and privileges from YAML or LDAP
* [SeeQR](https://www.theseeqr.io/) database analytic tool to compare the efficiency of different schemas and queries on a granular level
* [postgres\-basename\-dirname](https://github.com/elfsternberg/postgres-basename-dirname) contains functions which provide equivalents to the POSIX functions basename and dirname
* [postgresql\-similarity](https://github.com/urbic/postgresql-similarity) extension package which provides functions that calculate similarity between two strings
* [pg\_median\_utils](https://github.com/greenape/pg_median_utils) functions like median_filter which behaves the same as SciPy's [medfilt](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.14.0/reference/generated/scipy.signal.medfilt.html)
* [orafce](https://github.com/orafce/orafce) ORACLE compatibility functions
* [postgres\-typescript](https://github.com/Portchain/postgres-typescript) generates typescript functions from SQL files and lets you call these functions from your app
* [SPARQL compiler functions for PostgreSQL](https://github.com/lacanoid/pgsparql)

Engineers writing SQL-first code should use the following tools:

* [sqlcheck](https://github.com/jarulraj/sqlcheck) and [plpgsql_check](https://github.com/okbob/plpgsql_check) for linting SQL source code
* [pgTAP](https://pgtap.org/) - Database testing framework for Postgres
* [pgcmp](https://github.com/cbbrowne/pgcmp) for comparing Postgres database schemas
* [Web-based Explain Visualizer \(pev\)](https://github.com/AlexTatiyants/pev) and [CLI query visualizer (gocmdpev)](https://github.com/simon-engledew/gocmdpev) for performance optimization
* [JSON Schema validation for PostgreSQL](https://github.com/gavinwahl/postgres-json-schema) when using JSON and JSONB columns
* Use [readable database errors](https://github.com/Shyp/go-dberror) as a guide for creating errors in the database which can be used in the front-end
* [postgresqltuner](https://github.com/jfcoz/postgresqltuner) script to analyse PostgreSQL database configuration, and give tuning advice
* Use [HyperLogLog data structures](https://github.com/citusdata/postgresql-hll) and [TopN PostgreSQL extension](https://github.com/citusdata/postgresql-topn) for higher performing value counting when data amounts get large
* See [GraphQL for Postgres](https://github.com/solidsnack/GraphpostgresQL) which teaches techniques for how to parse GraphQL queries and transform them into SQL, all inside PostgreSQL (this is not production-level code but is good for education)

Engineers needing to instrument PostgreSQL:

* Deno [Postgres SQL parser](https://github.com/oguimbal/pgsql-ast-parser)

Machine Learning without leaving PostgreSQL:

* [Apache MADlib](https://madlib.apache.org/)
* [mindsdb.com](https://mindsdb.com/) for machine Learning without leaving the database

Content engineers who need datasets:

* [pgloader](https://pgloader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) loads data from various sources into PostgreSQL
* [ISO\-3166 \- All countries and subcountries in the world](https://github.com/morenoh149/postgresDBSamples)

Precision Knowledge:

* [Beyond REST](https://netflixtechblog.com/beyond-rest-1b76f7c20ef6) is Netflix's approach to Rapid Development with GraphQL Microservices
* [6 Common Mistakes for SQL Queries that "Should be Working"](https://blog.arctype.com/6-common-mistakes-for-sql-queries/)
* [Postgres regex search over 10,000 GitHub repositories \(using only a Macbook\)](https://devlog.hexops.com/2021/postgres-regex-search-over-10000-github-repositories)
* [How to Modernize Your Data & Analytics Platform](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-1-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa/) parts [one](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-1-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa), [two](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-2-3-how-modernize-your-data-analytics-platform-alaa), [three](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-3-4-toolkit-modernizing-transmission-system-data-alaa-mahjoub), and [four](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-4-toolkit-modernizing-transmission-system-data-platform-mahjoub).

## Stateless, non-data-centric services, are out of scope

If a custom micro service is completely stateless and does not have anything to do with reading or writing structured data, it should be written in TypeScript hosted on Deno or other micro service using Microsoft Dapr sidecar.
